[THEME MUSIC]
>> So 1.1 billion women will
be in menopause by 2025.
If a woman lives long enough,
she will spend 40% of her life
in menopause.
>> Nice.
[LAUGHTER]
>> Yet we have no answers
for women as we go through
the menopausal process.
For the last 25 years, I have
literally been in the trenches
with these women,
listening to their stories,
hearing their
cries, teaching them
how to live a lifestyle
that matches their hormones.
I've even taken
them to supermarkets
and shown them how
to read labels.
I've customized family
plans and detox them.
And I have to tell you that
our health care system has
completely let us down.
>> Amen.
>> Yes.
>> So about 10 years ago, I
decided that I needed to move
out of my clinic and get out
into the world to teach what I
was teaching inside
the walls of my clinic.
And I have to tell you that
when I'm going out there
into the world,
women aren't just
suffering through menopause
with hot flashes or belly fat,
they are suffering with anxiety,
depression, irritability,
lack of joy.
They can't think straight, they
can't hold on to information.
And we just don't
have a solution.
So I created one.
I hired a team of researchers
to scour through PubMed.
Bring me the science.
Show me what we have that
can help what we can do
lifestyle-wise to help women.
And here's what I found.
This one's going
to blow your mind.
We don't just lose two hormones.
We don't just lose
estrogen and progesterone,
we lose dopamine, serotonin,
acetylcholine, glutamate, gaba,
oxytocin, BDNF.
Estrogen is a precursor
for serotonin, dopamine,
acetylcholine and glutamate.
Progesterone is a
precursor for gaba.
We are losing 10 neurochemicals
after the age of 40.
And we're not talking about it.
So I then went to my
team of researchers.
And I was like, well,
tell me what we got.
What can we do?
How can we support
all of these hormones
and all of these neurochemicals.
I call it our
neurochemical armor.
And the way that I look
at the menopausal journey
is that you go flying into
40 and you're like packed
with your neurochemicals.
And life's great.
By 50, that armor
is completely down.
And somebody looks at you wrong,
a spouse says something to you.
Maybe all of a
sudden, your husband's
breathing too loud in
the bed next to you.
Right?
And you want to kill him.
And there's a neurochemical
reason for that.
And so we have to start to
bring this understanding
that this armor is coming down
and that we are different.
We are not the same person we
were at 35, at 45, and at 55.
We are completely
different because we
are neurochemically different.
We think different, we act
different, we eat different,
we react to stress different.
And we deserve answers.
And what I learned from
my team of researchers,
we're still in this
process right now.
And it's blowing my mind.
Is that lifestyle-wise, we
have over 20 different things
that we can be doing.
First, fasting.
When you put yourself
into a fasted state,
you're not just burning fat.
And a lot of people come
to fasting to lose weight
and I'm going to ask you
to stay for mental health.
Because when you burn fat
and you make a ketone,
you increase BDNF, you help
to upregulate serotonin,
you improve your
neuroplasticity of your brain,
and you get a good dose of gaba.
So as estradiol is making
her exit out of your body,
you can turn to fasting to
all of a sudden upregulate
these other neurochemicals.
This is why I'm so
passionate about every woman,
but especially women over 40,
building a fasting lifestyle.
Because you have a neurochemical
system inside your body
that is there to work for you.
You just hadn't been
told how to use it.
And most people are just looking
at fasting as a weight loss
tool.
Second tool you have, exercise.
When you dive into the
research on exercise,
did you know HIIT
training, where
you're bringing your
heart rate up and down,
15 minutes of HIIT
training improves
neuroplasticity and
upregulates serotonin?
Did you also know that
when you lift weights,
you break down muscles
and that creates
a metabolite that goes
up into your brain
and also stimulates BDNF.
So where you might
have been working out
at 35 to lose weight,
could you work out at 45
to improve brain health?
But that workout is going to
have to look really different.
This is not about you getting
on the treadmill for an hour
and going, this is
about you working out
to support the
neurochemical loss that's
happening inside your brain.
Did you also know that
if you go out and for
an aerobic activity,
for 10 minutes,
you get a good dose of oxytocin.
Now, if you do that in the
sunlight without your glasses
on, you're stimulating serotonin
receptor sites in your eyes
so you're running, you're out
there, you're getting oxytocin,
you're getting serotonin.
And if you look straight
ahead and you scan the horizon
from right to left,
you're telling your brain
to calm down and relax, you're
running away from the predator.
1 10-minute exercise
can calm the fire
within the menopausal brain.
We also know we've got yoga.
Specific movements
starts to take us out
of that sympathetic
drive that so many of us
live in and can put us over
into a parasympathetic state.
But how many of us are going
to do yoga on a regular basis?
How many of us are leaning into
exercise as a mental health
tool?
Third thing we have, our breath.
All of this is
backed by science.
We have different
ways we can breathe
to create a neurochemical
reaction in our body.
Like 4-7-8 breathing.
Something really simple.
You breathe in through your
nose for 4, you hold it for 7,
and you exhale out
your mouth for 8,
and you've got some gaba.
So when progesterone
is making her exit
and she's like I'm out, you
can be like, no problem.
I'm just going to
start doing 4-7-8
breathing so that I can help
myself up upregulate gaba.
We also know
something miraculous
as hyperbaric oxygen, when you
lie in one of those chambers,
you're not just
chilling out and priming
your parasympathetic
nervous system,
but that oxygen is
compressed oxygen.
And so it goes into the receptor
sites in the brain, the neurons
in the brain that
estradiol used to stimulate
and no longer is stimulating.
And you can't think straight,
and you can't focus,
you get in a chamber, and all of
a sudden, oxygen goes in there
and does it for you.
Fourth thing we have is
connection and community.
Every time you go
out into the world
and you smile at
somebody, you get oxytocin
and they get oxytocin.
Every time we rally
around each other as women
and we lean into each other
and we support each other
and we raise each
other up, all the
neurotransmitters I just talked
about-- dopamine, serotonin,
acetylcholine, all
of those, based off
of science, connection
and community
and telling each other
amazing things, all of those
get upregulated.
From human interaction
with each other.
We have so many solutions.
But we have a
cultural hush that's
been going on
where we don't want
to talk about our
menopausal symptoms
and we have to start coming
together and supporting
each other and talking
about what's working
and bringing our communities
together and collaborating,
not competing.
One of the new
fascinations that I
have is with the Okinawa women.
In fact, I have a dream
that I'm going to go
visit these amazing women.
>> Oh.
>> Yeah.
And so one of the things
that the Okinawa women do
is they create a moai.
And a moai is a group of
women that come together
and share resources.
They share knowledge, they share
homes, they share families,
they share love,
they share play.
Everything that is in their
life is for the whole community.
Here, in the Western
world, we don't do that.
We isolate ourselves.
We bitch about our symptoms, we
start arguing about HRT, BHRT,
what should we do?
We don't come together and
create a loving, supportive
environment.
So my rally cry to you today is
that we start forming a moai.
That we start energetically
coming together
and helping each other
even if we're strangers.
And it's a must at
this point in time
because we are living in
a world with a health care
system that has left us behind.
>> Yes.
[APPLAUSE]
[THEME MUSIC]